

PremiumOpinionHome / New Zealand / PoliticsLobbying controversy centred on PM Christopher Luxon’s office stinks to high heaven – Audrey YoungOpinion byAudrey YoungSenior Political Correspondent·NZ Herald·28 May, 2026 11:30 AM11 mins to read
Audrey Young, Senior Political Correspondent at the New Zealand Herald based at Parliament, specialises in writing about politics and power. Follow author Subscribe to listenAccess to Herald Premium articles require a Premium subscription. 
Subscribe now to listen.Subscribe nowAlready a subscriber?  Sign in hereListening to articles is free for open-access content—explore other articles or learn more about text-to-speech. Listen(14:20)0CommentsGift articleSubscriber benefitThe ability to gift paywall-free articles is a subscriber only benefit. See more offers by clicking the button below.Subscribe nowAlready a subscriber?  Sign in hereSaveShareShare this articleReminder, this is a Premium article and requires a subscription to read.Copy LinkEmailFacebookTwitter/XLinkedInRedditGreens: Govt 'overstepping' on climate law changes | Ryan Bridge TODAYMarama Davidson & David Seymour debate climate law changes, the Australian budget, and the Marmite sandwich TikTok account. Video / Ryan Bridge TODAYVideo Player is loading.Play Video HideThis is a modal window. This modal can be closed by pressing the Escape key or activating the close button.07:50Playing NextPolitics panel: Is AI problematic in government decisions? | Ryan Bridge TODAY03:07NZ Herald Morning Headlines | Thursday, June 11, 202603:39Willis must not add fuel to the fire: Ruth Richardson on Budget 2026 | Ryan Bridge TODAYPlaySkip BackwardSkip ForwardMuteCurrent Time 0:00/Duration 0:00Loaded: 0%0:00Stream Type LIVESeek to live, currently behind liveLIVERemaining Time -0:00 1xPlayback RateChaptersChaptersDescriptionsdescriptions off, selectedSubtitlessubtitles settings, opens subtitles settings dialogsubtitles off, selectedAudio TrackFullscreenThis is a modal window.Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window.TextColorOpacityText BackgroundColorOpacityCaption Area BackgroundColorOpacityFont SizeText Edge StyleFont FamilyResetDoneClose Modal DialogEnd of dialog window. ShowClose Modal DialogThis is a modal window. This modal can be closed by pressing the Escape key or activating the close button.Marama Davidson & David Seymour debate climate law changes, the Australian budget, and the Marmite sandwich TikTok account. Video / Ryan Bridge TODAYNOW PLAYING • Greens: Govt 'overstepping' on climate law changes | Ryan Bridge TODAYMarama Davidson & David Seymour debate climate law changes, the Australian budget, and the Marmite sandwich TikTok account. Video / Ryan Bridge TODAYThis is a transcript of the Premium politics newsletter. To sign up, click here, select “Inside Politics with Audrey Young” and save your preferences.Welcome to Inside Politics. It is little wonder that Prime Minister Christopher Luxon has tried to downplay unacceptable practices in his own office in relation to disclosure of documents in the Smith v Fonterra case. It stinks. It might have been believable that one document handed to the PM’s office might be forgotten, not recorded or mislaid in a release under the Official Information Act of documents related to the case. But to have it happen twice suggests it was deliberate. And that suggests it is not an office that respects basic requirements of transparency under law.In June 2024, Fonterra gave the PM’s office a document setting out the case for a law change because of the Smith case, which is extremely important because it would open up a regime for dealing with greenhouse gas emitters, separate to the one run under the current law run by the Government. Unlock this article by subscribing to Herald Premium Herald Premium Weekly Access New Zealand's best journalism For the first 8 weeks, pay just $6.50 $1.50 per week See all offers Renews $6.50 per week Already a subscriber? Sign in here Or AdvertisementAdvertise with NZME.In July 2024, the same or similar document was given to the PM’s office by Z Energy. Both are large emitters and defendants in the case. Make a beeline for the BeehiveGet weekly politics headlines with commentary from our political experts straight to your inbox.Please email me competitions, offers and other updates. You can stop these at any time.Email addressSign UpBy signing up for this newsletter, you agree to NZME’s Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.Neither the documents nor meetings were disclosed in an Official Information Act request in March 2025 made by Dr Matt Hall, director of the Environmental Law Initiative, a supporter of the Smith case. The High Court ordered the disclosure only this year, after the Government announced it would be changing the law. Separating the issuesIt is important to separate three issues in this case.1. The first is whether there is anything wrong with big businesses lobbying the Government to change the law to prevent a move that could adversely affect them. And there is not. It happens all the time, and they would be negligent not to lobby in their own interests. Everybody should be entitled to lobby, including businesses. It is not an outrage that Fonterra and Z lobbied for change and got exactly what they wanted from a Government that shared their concerns. AdvertisementAdvertise with NZME.And let’s not forget that global group Greenpeace wanted the last Labour Government to ban new oil and gas exploration and, in a truly staggering breach of proper process, the policy decision was approved by the Cabinet without even a Cabinet paper to canvas its flow-on effects.2. The second issue is the Government’s decision to legislate against the substantive Smith case, which was set to begin in 2027 after procedural moves to strike it out failed. It is a case that employed an army of KCs of Winebox proportions and was destined to run for years. Several Labour MPs in the House this week suggested the time to legislate would have been after the substantive case had been finished.Everyone is agreed that retrospective legislation should be used only in exceptional circumstances. But there is a strong argument that this is an exceptional case. Basically, it is challenging parliamentary sovereignty. Parliament passed a law this term saying that agriculture (including Fonterra) should not have to start paying for its greenhouse gas emissions from January 2027. The Smith case, if successful, would establish a new type of law forcing Fonterra to reduce emissions.It would be a radical move. If all you care about is climate change, you probably won’t give a damn about parliamentary sovereignty, and you’ll be delighted that courts want to extend their powers at the expense of Parliament. But that will lead only to greater politicisation of the judiciary, as is the norm in the United States.(As it has done previously in laws with retrospective effect, the Government could pay for some or all of Smith’s legal bill for the inconvenience of ending his case.)3. The third issue is the lack of transparency over the disclosure of documents under the Official Information Act or in the discovery process. It is appalling, and sullies what should be a perfectly defensible position for the Government to take.There is nothing wrong with lobbying per se, but it needs to be transparent. Luxon has not accepted responsibility or given a proper explanation for his office’s failings. He has been lukewarm at best. He has simply passed the buck to Ministerial Services and asked them to remind people of their obligations. Luxon’s former chief policy adviser, Matt Burgess, was the official involved who received the documents, but unfortunately he would not comment on his actions. Quarrelsome coalitionNZ First leader Winston Peters isn't happy that National and Act are claiming credit for a backdown on home-schooling rules. Photo / Anna HeathWhile the appearance of coalition unity will be on display when Nicola Willis delivers her third Budget later today, the partners are starting to get on each other’s nerves, and it shows. New Zealand First leader Winston Peters is highly peeved that Act is claiming credit for a backdown by Education Minister Erica Stanford over plans to crack down on home-schooling in the Education and Training (System Reform) Amendment Bill. And Peters believes National muscled in on an NZ First gain last Friday to boost funding for St John Ambulance by $35 million over four years.AdvertisementAdvertise with NZME.It was clear in Question Time yesterday who Erica Stanford credits for her backdown: she thanked both coalition partners, but especially NZ First.She failed to thank one key player, Green MP Lawrence Xu-Nan, but it was probably his legendary attention to detail in legislation that dragged out the debate and gave Stanford time to delay. He filed 290 amendments to the bill, of which home-schooling was just a small part. The voting alone on amendments by him and Labour’s Ginny Andersen added about 4.5 hours to the process, he estimates. That gave Stanford time to reconsider for the time being, while she properly consults the people affected. Verrall is ducking for cover'Went too far': Hipkins on Labour's media training leak | Ryan Bridge TODAYLabour leader Chris Hipkins says he doesn't have an official position on 100 duck-sized horses, or one horse-sized duck. Video / Ryan Bridge TODAYVideo Player is loading.Play Video HideThis is a modal window. This modal can be closed by pressing the Escape key or activating the close button.07:24Playing NextChris Hipkins defends Rakesh Naidoo candidacy process and superannuation holiday home payoff06:45Public transport cap: How will Labour's policy actually work? | Ryan Bridge TODAY05:49Government "out of touch and disconnected" over Kiwis living in social housing | Ryan Bridge TODAYPlaySkip BackwardSkip ForwardMuteCurrent Time 0:00/Duration 0:00Loaded: 0%0:00Stream Type LIVESeek to live, currently behind liveLIVERemaining Time -0:00 1xPlayback RateChaptersChaptersDescriptionsdescriptions off, selectedSubtitlessubtitles settings, opens subtitles settings dialogsubtitles off, selectedAudio TrackFullscreenThis is a modal window.Beginning of dialog window. Escape will cancel and close the window.TextColorOpacityText BackgroundColorOpacityCaption Area BackgroundColorOpacityFont SizeText Edge StyleFont FamilyResetDoneClose Modal DialogEnd of dialog window. ShowClose Modal DialogThis is a modal window. This modal can be closed by pressing the Escape key or activating the close button.Everyone in Labour is that little bit wiser than they were on Sunday, not least the candidates at the Labour list Wellington regional conference, whose answers to the following question were anonymously leaked: “Would you rather fight 100 duck-sized horses or one horse-sized duck?” The most embarrassed among them must be health spokeswoman and Wellington North candidate Ayesha Verrall, who has lain low at Parliament all week after the widespread sharing of what must be mortifying audio of her impromptu answer in song. Leader Chris Hipkins was present at the conference but did not take part in the offending Q&A session. He called the question ridiculous and pointed to the now-obvious lesson: to treat everything as though it were being recorded. Public servants were once schooled in not writing down anything they would not want to see on the front page of the paper.A supreme answer to ducks v horsesLabour won’t confirm whether it is undertaking a witch hunt to find the source of the leak – although you can guarantee that it is. A big clue, one insider told me, was the quality of the leaked audio: it suggests it was not made in the room, because there was none of the laughter or clapping by more than 100 delegates present. That further suggests it was forwarded by someone who had access to a Zoom recording of the session, which recorded clear answers through a microphone.It turns out that the question has been floating around the internet for years. There is, of course, no right or wrong answer. It is apparently designed to test thinking and rationalising skills. It is sometimes asked of job applicants, but perhaps the most famous target was Judge Neil Gorsuch, who was asked it in 2017 at the Senate confirmation hearing for his nomination to the US Supreme Court, and there is a YouTube clip showing it. Arizona senator Jeff Flake told Gorsuch he had just received a text from his teenage son with a suggested question, it being the same as the duck-horse one above. Gorsuch, perhaps demonstrating his suitability for the bench, replied by not answering: “You can tell him I am very rarely at a loss for words, but you got me!”The battle of the North just got biggerThe selection of Ngāti Wai leader Aperahama Edwards to contest Te Tai Tokerau for Te Pāti Māori confirms that the electorate will be one of the most fascinating contests in November’s election. He was the guy who took the microphone off David Seymour mid-speech in 2025 during the powhiri for MPs at Waitangi. Seymour’s Treaty Principles bill was still a live issue before Parliament at that point, and was yet to be voted down. Edwards’ opponents will be three sitting MPs: the current MP Mariameno Kapa-Kingi, who has split from Te Pati Maori and will stand as a candidate for a Te Tai Tokerau party; Labour MP Willow-Jean Prime, who stood in Northland last election; and Green list MP Hūhana Lyndon.By the wayThat speech: Much praise was heaped on the pre-Budget speech of Prime Minister Christopher Luxon for its strategic overview and deft turn of phrase. Of course, Luxon must take the credit for it because it was developed and delivered by him, but it is understood from several sources that his young policy adviser Joe Ashcroft was the official who worked on it.Congratulations: Former TVNZ political editor Maiki Sherman was named Political Journalist of the Year at last week’s NZ Media Awards, a fortnight after she resigned amid controversy. Her portfolio comprised three stories about the bust-up of Te Pāti Māori. “This award simply reaffirms to me everything that I’ve known in my heart, that I am a darned good journalist,” she said in her acceptance speech. (That didn’t need any affirmation, Maiki). Hopefully, she will put her considerable talents to use again soon. Incidentally, the judges’ decision was filed on March 30, well before publicity emerged about an argument she had with a fellow journalist at pre-Budget drinks a year ago (and which was settled at the time).Congratulations (the sequel): This week’s release of the MPs’ pecuniary interests register included an item under David Seymour’s declaration of an engagement gift from Act MPs, without saying what it was. Seymour’s office tells us it was a Prezzy Card, which he and fiancée Alexandra Vincent Martelli used to get a membership to their local tennis club.Quote unquote“The deficit this year, measured by the traditional OBEGAL metric, is expected to be $16.9 billion. That’s a sum so large that, even if the Government were to win every single Lotto prize ever handed out since Lotto was established in 1987 (about $16.2b), it would still be about half a billion dollars short of making the Budget add up.” – Herald political editor Thomas Coughlan, previewing today’s BudgetMicro quizParliament disestablished a ministry last night. Which one? (Answer at the bottom of this article.)BrickbatTake your pick: Finance Minister Nicola Willis for suggesting people in social housing have “effectively won the Lotto”, or her Labour counterpart Barbara Edmonds for suggesting Willis was a “duck-faced horse”. In their favour, both women apologised swiftly and sincerely.BouquetGoes to Foreign Minister Winston Peters for talking to Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi to impress upon him the need for a settlement with the United States. They finished up talking about the Fifa World Cup match between Iran and New Zealand on June 16.This week’s top storiesIran war: Winston Peters speaks to Iran Foreign Minister Abbas AraghchiAnalysis – Budget 2026: Here’s what we know is in it and what we think is likely to come – Thomas CoughlanCoalition row: NZ First claims National, Act breaching coalition agreement after home-school backdownAnalysis – Budget 2026: Horses, ducks and rabbits out of a hat: What to expect in the Budget – Thomas CoughlanAnalysis – Budget 2026: Cost cutting, reprioritisation and maybe a little sweet treat - what to expect in the Budget – Jenée TibshraenyLobbying controversy: Greens accuse National of ‘cover up’ in climate lobbying debacleLobbying controversy: PM says staffer who got climate lobbying document ‘left a while ago’Labour leak: Leaked Labour audio reveals Barbara Edmonds’ ‘duck-faced horse’ jabAnalysis – Labour policy: When will Labour release policy? It may not be when you expect – Jamie EnsorBudget 2026: Govt unveils $1.2b loan scheme for businesses hit hard by gas pricesNash comeback: Ex-Labour minister Stuart Nash confirms switch to NZ FirstBudget 2026: Govt announces $79m wilding pine eradication schemeBudget 2026: $35m boost announced for ambulance servicesPolitics up close: Good politics v good government – inside Cabinet minister Casey Costello’s officeQuiz answer: The Ministry for the Environment, which paves the way for it to become part of the Ministry for Cities, Environment, Regions and Transport (MCERT) from July 1.For more political news and views, listen to On the Tiles, the Herald’s politics podcast.Gift articleSubscriber benefitThe ability to gift paywall-free articles is a subscriber only benefit. See more offers by clicking the button below.Subscribe nowAlready a subscriber?  Sign in hereSaveShareShare this articleReminder, this is a Premium article and requires a subscription to read.Copy LinkEmailFacebookTwitter/XLinkedInReddit0CommentsLatest from PoliticsNew ZealandThe RSV delay exposing NZ’s child health gapWatch12 Jun 04:50 PMPremiumPoliticsWinston Peters turns on National, coalition in fiery Fieldays speech12 Jun 04:00 PMPoliticsNew poll suggests voters unwavered by Govt Budget as Peters nears Luxon, Hipkins as preferred PM12 Jun 11:06 AMSponsoredNZ CIO Innovation Summit brings tech leaders together to think bigger12 Jun 02:32 PMAdvertisementAdvertise with NZME.


